Global warming is no longer just a prediction—it
is actually happening. It is
undisputed that the average temperature
at the surface of the Earth has increased
over the past century by about 1°F
(0.6°C), with both the air and the
oceans warming.1 Since 1880, when
people in many locations first began to
keep temperature records, the 25 warmest
years have all occurred within the
last 28 years.2 Scientists know with
absolute certainty that the observed
dramatic increase in the atmospheric
concentrations of greenhouse gases since
pre-industrial times (to levels higher
than at any other time in at least the
last 420,000 years) has been caused by
human activities, mostly the burning
of fossil fuels (coal, oil, and natural gas),
and to a lesser extent, deforestation.3
The ability of greenhouse gases, such
as carbon dioxide, methane, and nitrous
oxide, to trap heat at the Earth’s surface
is also scientifically well understood.
While it has not yet been precisely
determined how much of the recent
warming was caused by human activities,
the consensus among climate
scientists is that most of the warming
over the past 50 years was probably
caused by human-produced greenhouse
gases. (See statements issued by the
National Academy of Sciences, the
American Meteorological Society, the
American Geophysical Union, the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change, and the national academies
of eleven countries.)4 Recent precise
measurements of the heat content of
the world’s oceans, which show an
increase close to the amount expected
from warming by greenhouse gases,
strengthen the consensus view.5,6
Many among the public may have
the misconception that global warming
Introduction
is a distant threat, with consequences
that will only be felt many decades from
now. The fact is, many widely accepted,
peer-reviewed scientific studies have
found evidence that global warming has
already had major impacts on ecosystems
and societies across the world.
Glaciers all around the world and
Arctic sea ice have been shrinking and
disappearing; sea level has been rising
and flooding low-lying areas; lifethreatening
heat waves, flooding rainstorms,
droughts, and forest fires have
become more intense and frequent over
recent decades; corals are “bleaching”
and dying in response to higher ocean
temperatures; and numerous animal and
plant species are migrating away from
the higher temperatures, toward the
poles and higher elevations. While a
direct causal link to global warming has
been established for some observed
changes, such as sea-level rise and
worldwide glacial retreat, such a link
is difficult to definitively establish for
other changes, such as the increased
incidence of droughts or the migration
of a particular species. However, the
multitude of changes collectively provides
a consistent and clear body of
evidence of the immediate and growing
danger that global warming brings.
Using the terminology of those tasked
with protecting public health, “the weight
of the evidence,” or information compiled
from all available studies, points
strongly to global warming as a force
behind the observed changes. At risk
are the health of the global economy,
of human individuals and communities,
and of the ecosystems upon which we
depend for food, clean water, other
resources, and spiritual sustenance.
Carbon dioxide and other greenhouse
gases stay in the atmosphere for a
2
century or longer after being emitted.7
The greenhouse gases we have already
added to the atmosphere since the
Industrial Revolution have therefore
committed the globe to a certain
amount of continued warming over the
coming decades no matter what we do
with future emissions.8,9,10 Humanity
may have only a narrow window of time
left, perhaps a decade or so, to begin the
long process of stabilizing greenhouse
gas concentrations at a level that can
avert devastating and irreversible impacts
from climate change.11,12
This report summarizes some of
the major impacts that global warming
has already had across the world,
including some that have been observed
since the publication of major assessments
by the Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change (IPCC) and the
National Academy of Sciences in
2001.13 Our goal is to provide policymakers,
journalists, and the public with
facts so that they can make informed
decisions on the measures needed to
stem the global-warming tide. We have
made every effort to ensure that the
document is scientifically rigorous,
noting where the link between a
particular phenomenon and global
warming may not be fully established
or where other causative factors may
be involved. We have relied almost
exclusively on information from peerreviewed
scientific publications and
government websites; the few exceptions
include a Munich Re company report, a
National Geographic article, and a BBC
News article.
There are many more examples of
global warming impacts than can fit
into an easily digestible report like this.
For more comprehensive information,
the reader may want to refer to other
recent reports, such as the 2004 Arctic
Climate Impact Assessment; Status of
Coral Reefs of the World: 2004; the 2000
National Assessment of Climate Change
Impacts on the United States; and the
IPCC Third Assessment Report.
14 For
a comprehensive rebuttal of skeptics’
claims regarding the science of global
warming, see an earlier report of ours,
The Latest Myths and Facts on Global
Warming, available at http://www.undoit
.org/what_is_gb_myth.cfm. Occasional
updates to the present report are
planned. Suggestions for improvements
and additions are welcome. Please
send suggestions to: Dr. James Wang,
Environmental Defense, 257 Park
Avenue South, New York, NY 10010;
jwang@environmentaldefense.org
